VLANs and VPNs

Again i dedicate this section to professor messer's content for helping me have the base material and structure to work with as im trying to make this guide. Now onto the good part.

Now what is a LAN? A LAN is a local area network. It's just a bunch of devices in the same broadcast domain. So if you can imagine a subnet is a room, you can consider a LAN as kind of the building where your room is at same as during the azure relevant information section i showed you earlier. Now these devices can talk to one another because of a switch, a switch is like in those old buildings the pneumatic tube system each room is connected to so they can send stuff to each other and to themselves. They're in the same LAN and if you have different devices they can talk to each other. So if you want a different building or network you'd need to have another one constructed so its another isolated instance of whatever devices you want to. Now that's all fine and dandy but there's a teensy tiny problem: a huge number of switches are left unused. This is similar to the classful situation in the sense that people would end up getting too much for what they actually need. Imagine that, you do have a building complete with the tube system the works. A few people are using the system just fine, but thats the main issue its only a few people, a huge amount of tubes are still being unused. You being the genius that you are decided to construct another building to host a different set of people...still few. at that rate you can say goodbye to your money because of the costs and maintenance. 

Never fear however, since we all made that mistake in our thinking process before. So how do we fully utilize the same tubing system while making sure that the rooms and object who use it have privacy from each other? Simple this is what's called a VLAN or a Virtual Local Area Network. Instead of buying another building and tubing system upfront, we can instead use our current tubing system and apply privacy and segmentation(a fancy word for dividing stuff) at the logical not physical level. So if you go look on a switch you'd see your own devices connected and so how vlan works is it can allot slots to a certain network so each batch of slots is "technically: a network.

Since we got VLANs out of the way i want to talk about VPNs next. You will have more or less some exposure to VPNs. In the play or Appstore they're called like nordvpn, surfshark and etc. VPN means a virtual private network, you would think that it's just used do you can watch restricted by your region stuff because providers like Netflix are jerks am i right? On a very very high level, what it does is it takes the data you give and receive through the internet through a private tunnel, and if someone with bad intentions would try to intercept that traffic they wouldn't get any useful info, just scrambled jargon. It's like once a letter (data) comes out of your building instead of your regular post office guy, an armored truck with a bunch of heavily armed dudes take your letter, put it in a sensitive case and sends it to the destination that you want. God forbid someone attacked that convoy, since its in a case if they access your letter inside all they would see is a bunch of random letters because the case needs to be decrypted before being readable. A part of this is called a VPN concentrator a networking appliance typically fitted in your firewall, it's like your own personal army delivering your messages in a secure manner. This is enterprise grade stuff though, so you'd be better off with 5 bucks a month from a subscription.   

This is achieved through a mix of both hardware and software aspects like the concentrator i mentioned and there are also many types of how you can deploy your own VPNs. There's some purely hardware or some purely software and some that has a varying ratio between the two. But generally for some of them you do need to use them with your client software. Nordvpn as an example we can consider as a software solution, so you need to use their software so you can have a VPN. This means regardless of where you connect even if its not recommended you can still have a layer of security for example accessing an open wifi network(still very unsecure).

Now, when we're trying to connect other networks with VLANs through their switches, if we configure it correctly we can simply just take ethernet cables that correspond to each other's vlans. Like for example, i have vlan one on 4 ports, and on the other i also have 4 ports, i can connect those two and they will be able to talk normally. Sounds simple right? because in small settings you can get away with it. Now i want you to imagine linking 100 or 1000 vlans, the switches dont have that enough ports and you also dont have enough cables either. By the time you even finish crimping each and every one, you would've seen man go to the Moon a second time already. That is why trunking exists. 

What is trunking? A VLAN trunk basically is a one stop shop for your switch so it can send and receive data from multiple VLANs all in one cable. This is also referred as 801.1Q VLAN trunking. This is only applicable to physical settings but the concepts still need to be understood because the next section network segmentation you will understand the necessary logic to how to provision your limited network resources. So the trunking process itself might not help you much in your azure journey but its underlying principles definitely will.

To speed things up, it's like youre sending a letter to the post guy and you have a stamp on, so if the post guy knows which block or district it belongs to, even if carrying a bunch of other letters with multiple different stamps. But when your receiver finally gets your letter they get rid of the stamp yuo put in because it only serves as to identify where you want your letter to go.

Network Segmentation

I honestly was bracing myself for another thesis dissertation on this topic but im frankly disappointed on how easy is the principle, im going to explain to you. There are a number of reasons why network segmentation exists. For the sake of actually explaining something of worth to you r and your learning i will at the very least go a little bit in depth when it comes for each of the use cases

Security, this is the most obvious one. We segment networks on the basis of this logic, we don't want neighbors snooping around and finding our personal problems basically, we dont want to look at other neighbor's crap either and if something bad happens to them, that same bad thing wont happen to us. Especially when sensitive information like credit cards are involved, they do need to be segmented so customers and ne'er do wells cant reach them that easily. 

Efficiency, as for this benefit. It goes back to how you will use azure software to properly provision your subnets. If you are able to give just enough resources to either a device or a service ironically they would work better than having too much or too little. it also helps to bear in mind that resources is money. Network segmentation helps us to be more efficient by allowing the possibilities of spreading our resources wherever we need it instead of just buying another and another. thats a bad mindset to have as a future cloud engineer.

Compliance, this one is the least interesting of the three i can think of so far. Although you do need to understand why certain rules are in place for a reason, like for example in the nuclear research industry, they always have strict compliance measures for limiting radiation exposure by time, distance and shielding. As the saying goes, regulations are written in someone else's blood. Some industries and devices need to be properly segmented because they're critical infrastructure or life saving machines. Those devices need to have their own stable, secure and properly isolated bubble to keep our society running.

And all three? Is important for you to bear in mind whenever we progress on our journey, because its not a job to be a cloud engineer. It's a hard earned privilege and responsibility especially if youre working in critical infrastructure.  

Azure Relevant Information section

Now I think its part of a funny joke that the main course material im referencing right now comes from the April fools video he made for 2025. But nevertheless the content found in the video i think is the exact video i need to convey the information. It comes from the stuff i already mentioned within the subnets section earlier. But with a lot subtle burger jokes. Nothing much has changed actually so you can just go back to that section.

Microsoft Learn Section

For this section specifically, we're going to focus on the main learn sandbox stuff for the az 104. Although i might have a separate readme that overviews what i did for this entire section i think here gives me a bit more oomph to go over what i did on the Microsoft learn stuff. Admittedly there might be a lot of hand holding but whats important is that you recognize whats going on and if you dont you always ask and then try again. 

So, the lab activity we're going to try out for today is from the 'Configure virtual networks' module on the AZ-104. The structure will be based on sub-sections i will lay out here so from here on out it'll be my synthesis of the entire module to make it well, understandable for both of us so far. 

Introduction

Remember our metaphors the one where we consider our network a building? The things that we are going to talk about involves virtual networks so similar to vlans they are networks but theyre like that in a logical sense, its mostly software defined stuff but admittedly they can and do have real connectivity but within private networks so if you connect your stuff to azure it's with a vpn or ExpressRoute(if your company is loaded). VNets are mainly for securing communications with their resources there, also scalability and availability. Scalability means that if you need more of a said resource you can expand current capacity or acquire more instances of that resource to accommodate your needs. Availability means even if hell freezes over, your services and operations are still running no matter what. 

Plan Virtual Networks

Earlier i mentioned things about network segmentation and why does the concept exist in the first place. Those principles perfectly apply to how we want to plan our networks here. Planning makes sure you don't over or under allocate addresses within your virtual network. It totally depends on your use cases whether you're just planning a small scale project or a huge cloud server. You can either create a dedicated private cloud-only virtual network(fancy way of saying you can literally prop up a cloud server), securely extend your data center with virtual networks(so if you want to connect your on premises stuff to the cloud you can do it but for the sole reason to extend capacity) or enable hybrid cloud scenarios(just the same as the second point but your intent is to facilitate certain stuff on prem and then in the cloud). So to tie back to our metaphors, this is how Azure, a construction company wants to give you the opportunity to have your own personal building somewhere far away, they're in charge of everything except whats the layout of the building and the rooms sectioned off and the objects within those rooms and how is the floor plan structured. 

Create Subnets

I've already talked about the stuff you would mostly need in the previous sections however i do want to add a few key considerations. You should consider service requirements. Every resource has their own network requirements in the building created by Azure and the types of data coming and going from these services. A service like an azure firewall, will definitely need their own dedicated subnet so they can function properly. Consider your network virtual appliances, as we go over more advanced stuff within this guide we have to consider that Azure naturally routes network traffic between all subnets in a network. That's a huge no no when it comes to security, but we can override the settings wherever it applies accordingly. Consider also your network security groups because they act as your firewalls, allowing or not allowing certain ip ranges and whatnot. 

Create Virtual Networks

These are pretty straightforward and so easy yet dry i dont even know what to commentate on so here you go:

When you create a virtual network, you need to define the IP address space for the network.

Plan to use an IP address space that's not already in use in your organization.

The address space for the virtual network can be either on-premises or in the cloud, but not both.

To create a virtual network, you need to define at least one subnet.

Each subnet contains a range of IP addresses that fall within the virtual network address space.

The address range for each subnet must be unique within the address space for the virtual network.

The range for one subnet can't overlap with other subnet IP address ranges in the same virtual network.

You can create a virtual network in the Azure portal. Provide the Azure subscription, resource group, virtual network name, and service region for the network.

The last thing i can tell you is that your subnetting will help you in this section, specifically if you're a visual thinker like me the switches analogy will go a long way, and power of twos as well because when you're working on the portal directly a lot of information is provided like how much available ips per subnet respectively


Plan IP addressing

Now all you need to know about these are very simple:

We're going to use our id card idea for this example. You want to place a private id card(ip address) onto your objects(services/devices) if it means managing your stuff within your virtual network, however if you have public-facing services like hosting a website you should get a public ipv4 address(its cheap anyway). Usually you can just use dynamic addressing to solve most of your problems but for the sake of you getting your experience in and making sure you have a bit of muscle memory i recommend going manual at least for now, especially when we're making our networks with nsgs where they will always just base on the ip ranges you dish out. Also for my own personal context as of the time of this writing, its important in a sense where i would need dns services or if my budget allows a personal domain i can keep up for cheap where i can host the webapp we have. 

